once around series. I was fascinated
when I read Sir Patrick Moore's book
back in the 1960s and discovered that
there was another world orbiting in the
solar system that I'd never heard of.
And I've been interested in series ever
since. The story goes back to Johannes
Kepler and his mysterium cosmographicum
publication in which he wrote between
Mars and Jupiter I place a planet. This
was all based on the idea
of mapping the solar system and the
distances from the sun to the planets
by the analogy with the platonic solids,
the tetrahedrin,
cube, docahedron, sphere, etc. and
placing these one inside the other,
nesting
them in the right order, you could make
them fit together such that the
characteristic
distances for the sizes of the various
solids matched the orbits of the known
planets except for the fact that there
was a problem. There was a gap between
Mars and Jupiter where one of the solids
had to be placed where there was no
known planet. So this led Kepler to the
idea that there was a planet yet to be
discovered, planet number
five. And he wasn't the only person to
think this.
Titus and later Bode who picked up the
idea worked out that there was a rule of
thumb mathematical formula that involved
starting from Mercury and adding a
constant multiplied by a power of two
and you could easily get a map of the
distances of the known planets again
having to skip over
one between Mars and Jupiter. So here's
the maths. You start with 0.4 4 which is
the distance of Mercury and you add 0.3
to it times a number which goes 0.12 48
16 32 doubling at each step uh except
for the first one of course which is a
bit of a cheat but it produces
0.4.7 1.0 for Earth 1.6 for Mars then it
produces 2.8 where there is no planet
and then 5.2 2 for Jupiter and it
produces 10 for Saturn. Well, that's not
quite right for Saturn. It should really
be 9.6, but it's close. And so, this was
intriguing as indicating that there was
some structure and organization to the
distances of the planets in the solar
system. And then along came Sir William
Hershel with his discovery of Uranus. He
was observing looking for double stars
from his backyard at his home in Bath in
England and he spotted a moving
disc-like object which he reported to
the Royal Astronomical Society as a new
comet. But more observations and
calculations of its orbit showed that it
wasn't behaving like a comet. It had no
tail, but it was orbiting in a near
circular orbit 19.2 two astronomical
units from the sun, nearly double the
distance that Saturn was. And it was
soon realized that this was in fact a
new planet that had been discovered, the
planet
Uranus. And if you plug in the numbers
into Bod's law, you get 19.6. You get
point4 plus.3 times the next number, 64
in the
sequence. And that's a pretty good fit
for 19.2.
In fact, it's a better fit than the
previous prediction of Saturn would have
been. So, everybody thought, "Wow, we've
got a law here that is predictive rather
than just having been fitted to the
known data." And this led to people
wondering what was going on at 2.8
astronomical units. And a group called
the Celestial Police was put together
comprising many famous astronomers from
all over Europe, including Neville
Masculine, the British Royal Astronomer,
and other luminaries to hunt down this
missing planet number five in the Mars
Jupiter Gap. Well, that was in 1800.
They got scooped on the 1st of January
1801 by this guy Jappi Bazzi and he
found a moving point of light. He
thought originally he found a comet but
by the 24th of January he checked its
movement and said that it was going so
slowly and in a uniform manner that he
thought it probably wasn't a comet and
he was right.
The mathematician Gaus had recently
invented a new way of calculating orbits
from just three observations and soon
showed that this object was right at 2.8
astronomical units just where the Titus
Bode law had predicted it. And so Piazi
had found a new planet. Now he suggested
the name uh series Fernandia after the
king of Sicily. I think he wanted to
become royal astronomer. Um, actually
Hershel tried the same trick. He tried
to name Uranus after King George, but
that didn't work. And it didn't work
here either in that the Fernandia part
was dropped and the name series was
adopted after the Roman god of the
harvest. And it was deemed to be a new
planet and assigned a planetary symbol
that you can see at the top right there
and listed as a new planet for about 50
years.
It was orbit was right where it was
predicted going around the sun in a
nearly circular but somewhat eccentric
orbit tilted at about 10° to the solar
system plane. So not extreme but
slightly unusual for a planet. Um
perhaps that's why it hadn't been seen
before because it wandered away from the
ecliptic plane um of the orbit of all
the other planets so much.
Well, the other interesting thing about
this is that it does seem to be somehow
related to Mars because the orbits are
such that Mars has its perihelion and
its close approach on the opposite side
to series. Um, and that seems to be true
for some of the other main asteroids,
probably due to interactions with Mars's
gravity. But it wasn't long before
others were found. Three more Juno past
Pal palace and Vesta were soon tracked
down over the next few years and of
those palace along with seriesiries was
in the 2.77 AU right where expected Juno
a little closer at 2.67 67 and Vesta.
Well,
2.36 somewhat out of that exact match,
but still orbiting around together. And
these were all deemed to be
planets. But no matter what uh new
telescopes were turned to them, they
never showed a disc. They always seem to
be starlike points of light. And so, Sir
William Hershel came up with the term
asteroid, meaning like a star. Um, and
they all got classified as asteroids for
the next 150
years. Frustrating that these little
tiny things that should have been
planets just refuse to show any disc at
all. And they are quite small. Series is
the largest of them. 950 km in diameter,
600 miles. Um, and you can see it to
scale there with the moon and earth. So
you can see it's rather small. It's much
smaller than the moon, but it and it on
its own contains a third of the mass of
all of the known asteroids. So it's by
far the largest of them as
well. This is a Hubble Space Telescope
picture of it. It's uh generally too
faint to spot with the naked eye. You
can find it with binoculars as a tiny
little point. But as I've said, until we
had uh telescopes of the capability of
Hubble, we couldn't really get any
details at all. You can see this color
image, little bit fuzzy, not very many
pixels in it. And a slight hint of a
white spot at the top there. We've got a
series of black and white pictures here
showing that white spot and showing it
moving as the uh little world rotates on
its axis.
And it was hypothesized that this was
frost on the surface and that even there
might be a tenuous atmosphere just
managing to stick around in the
relatively cool temperature. So the
maximum temperature on series minus 38°
but it gets very very cold at the poles
and in the shadows in the bottom of the
deep craters where the sun never shines.
So, an interesting little world classed
as an asteroid after 50 years of being a
planet. But the question was revisited
in
2006. The astronomical community, the
IAU, debated what to do about our
definition of the word planet. The
Greeks had meant wanderer and had
included the moon and the sun as
planets. We no longer used that. But
with the discovery of 2003 UB 313, now
called Albian by Dave Dwitt and Jane
Louu, out there in the Kiper belt,
opening the floodgates on finding more
objects out beyond Pluto. It was getting
difficult to really know how many
planets we had in the solar system and
whether we were going to end up with
dozens of them. with the discovery of
things like erys that seem to be on a
par with Pluto in terms of size. So
should we call that a planet? And it was
realized that we really didn't have a
definition. One definition that was
proposed by the IAU originally was that
the object needed to be massive enough
for itself gravity to pull it
round. Needed to orbit a star and not be
a star or in orbit around another
planet. And that would have made series
the fifth planet from the sun because it
would have fitted all of those criteria.
But so would a lot of other objects,
Pluto, of course, AIS, many of the Kiper
belt objects and indeed some of the
other objects in the asteroid belt would
just about have been uh candidates for
that as well.
So a definition had to be chosen and
they went for one that excluded series
and Pluto demoting them to dwarf planet
status or in series's case perhaps
promoting it from an asteroid up to
being a dwarf planet. So that's where we
are at the moment.
The story then continues because in
2007 the dawn space prior was launched
to go to the asteroid belt and visit
Vesta and seriesir. I arrived at Vesta,
stayed a year from 2011 to 2012, making
excellent uh detailed maps of the
surface and carrying out various
spectroscopy and science experiments and
then flew on relighting its uh ion
engines and flew to series and went into
orbit there in 2015 where it remains. It
now has no fuel left so it can't go
anywhere else unfortunately. That would
have been far too good.
So what did it find? Well, as it
approached series, it confirmed the
existence of those white spots, but they
were much smaller and more intense than
the rather blurry distant images had
shown. It confirmed the spherical shape,
squeezing itself into a nice round
little world, um, more so than any of
the other asteroids. But the real
surprise was those spots right in the
center of what's called the Okarta
crater. These strange white features
were seen. And as this color photograph
from yet closer shows, we're beginning
to get more detail and show that there
is structure within those spots. Here's
an oblique picture taken on a flyby of
the large crater with those white
regions in the center. And gradually the
orbit was lowered and we got some very
close flybys with this shot of those
white spots showing cracks and grooves
in the ground reminiscent of those on
other ice worlds like Europa and these
strange heaps of white material that
seem to have been deposited somehow.
Well, a color photograph revealed that
there is something going on here and
this was analyzed with a spectroscope
and shown to be a mixture of salts. So,
sodium chloride, uh, magnesium, calcium,
Epsom salts, all sorts of things that
had obviously been brought to the
surface. Here's an oblique view of that
spot. central rise there being colorized
somewhat to reveal the different
chemicals present um within the eruption
of material coming from
underneath. And this is believed to have
been a briny salty ocean of water
pushing its way to the surface and then
the water subliming out into space and
leaving behind all of the salts on the
surface.
In fact, we've seen this cryo volcano
activity elsewhere on series. These low
temperature volcanoes have produced
things like this ice mountain where
there is some up thrust coming up taking
the dusty surface up on top but the
bright white ice being
revealed. And this is because series
turns out to be very rich in water. This
is a spectrographic map of the water
content according to uh the different
parts of the surface of series. It's
actually mapping hydrogen but that is a
very very good proxy for hydration in
the minerals and a lot of water. And
what it shows is that particularly at
the poles there is a very large amount
of water trapped there. And in fact,
we've since this uh image was created
detected plumes of water being erupted
from some of that cryo volcanic
activity. And it's a real mystery as to
what is powering the activity, the
geological processes within the core of
series. It should be small enough to
have cooled down and solidified
completely. So there should not be any
further geological activity.
This is perhaps indicative of the fact
that it might have undergone some more
recent uh reorganization. Maybe there
was a giant impact and we haven't
detected the signs of that on the
surface there. We just don't quite
understand this one. But it looks like
from the spectroscopy and the
magnetometer readings and those spots
that the structure is that there is a
rocky inner core with a water ice layer
over the top of it and then the thin
dusty outer crust covering over. And
this perhaps explains the uh water being
erupted to the surface and why the
craters all look to be somewhat in soft
focus uh because they're made of ice
rather than being made of much firmer
rock. And just to wrap up, I've got one
final shot for you, which is a 3D
picture
taken constructed from the flyby data of
seriesir within the floor of that Okarta
crater where all those white spots are
erupting. And so I'll leave it there.
But series, a fascinating little world.
And even though we have flown a probe
there, we've still not landed. And it
would be really interesting to get a
lander down onto the surface, ideally a
rover, and drive around on this
fascinating little dwarf planet out
there in the asteroid belt. Thanks very
much.